- Campaigning is very expensive
- 2 ways to contribute $ to political campaigns
	- **campaign contributions**: donations made directly to candidate/party that is reported to FEC
		- As of 2012, $2500 per election to candidate, $30800 to political party
	- **independent expenditures**: expenses on behalf of a political message; made by groups that are uncoordinated with any candidate's election
# Regulations on Campaign Contributions
- illegal camp. contributions in the Watergate Scandal 
- **Federal Election Campaign Act**: reforms campaign finances; created FEC and provided limits on and disclosure of campaign contributions
	- transform private campaign finance to open book for public
	- all candidates for federal office must:
		- disclose who has contributed $
		- how campaign $ is spent
- **Political Action Committees (PAC)**: groups that raise $ from individuals and then distributes it in the form of contributions to candidates the groups support.
	- must reg. w/ FEC
	- $ ==> PAC: $5000/year
	- PAC => Candidate: $5000/election
- **Federal Election Commission (FEC)**: 6-member bipartisan agency created by FEC Act, administers and enforces campaign finance laws
	- 3 spots for dem, 3 spots for rep
- system of using taxpayer dollars to pay a substantial part of prez. camp
	- became obsolete after 1974
	- limited to $3 voluntary check box on tax returns
	- candidates have to agree to restrictions for tax $
- **soft money**: Political contributions earmarked for party-building expenses at the grassroots level or for generic party advertising. For a time, such contributions were unlimited, until they were banned by the McCain–Feingold Act.
# Regulations on Independent Political Expenditures
- $ given to candidates by big money found a loophole which allowed them to contribute $ to a **527 group**: independent political groups that are not subject to contribution restrictions because they do not directly seek the election of particular candidates.
	- name given by section 527 of tax code
- Independent Expenditures by 527s were partially restricted by McCain-Feingold
- major provision prohibited corps and unions from using general treasury funds to pay for electioneering comms
- **Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission**: A 2010 landmark Supreme Court case that ruled that individuals, corporations, and unions could donate unlimited amounts of money to groups that make independent political expenditures.
- **501(c) groups:** Groups that are exempted from reporting their contributions and can receive unlimited contributions. Section 501c of the tax code specifies that such groups cannot spend more than half their funds on political activities.
- **Super PACs**: Independent expenditure-only PACs are known as Super PACs because they may accept donations of any size and can endorse candidates. Their contributions and expenditures must be periodically reported to the FEC.
# Are Campaigns Too Expensive?
- contests to presidency and Congress ~$5 billion
- rising costs of high-tech campaigning brings cost
# Does Money Buy Victory?
- most basic complaint - $ spent = votes received
- Gary Jacobson found that the more candidates spend, the less votes they get
- having enough money is better than more