# Summary
The well-renowned bank Wells Fargo stated that Hispanic workers may be more likely to be heavily affected by the 2023 recession, because the unemployment rate for the Hispanic population tends to be higher than the national average. Data from the last recession in 2008 indicates that the Hispanic unemployment rate is 5 percent higher than the non-Hispanic unemployment rate. Job composition and age of most Hispanic workers tends to be one of the main factors of the effect. Younger workers (which tend to be Hispanic) are more likely to be laid off because there is less experience in those fields.
# Analysis
The author is quite blunt about the way that they present their facts. This is obviously not an opinion piece, which proves the reason for the bluntness. The author wrote this article to inform the readers about the potential consequences that a recession in 2023 could have on Hispanic people. The audience that the author intends this article to be read by are Hispanic people, that are around the age to get jobs. Younger audiences that are still in school are less likely to be affected by this. They also reference data from Wells Fargo, which is a highly known bank that has many people associated with it. This allows the data to be highly credible, which is an important pointer for this. 
# Personal Response
Personally, I am not as affected by this than others. This is because I am not Hispanic. This would more likely be aimed towards a Hispanic person, who works jobs that tend to be less secure. I still feel like the data is quite credible, and the claim makes sense, as seen by the fact that Hispanic workers tend to work jobs that don't really provide security. Also, I am not at the age that I could be affected by this, since I am still in school. 