Tags: [[Stave 3]] [[Literature]] [[Literature Notes]]

The walls and ceiling were so hung with living red, that it looked like a perfect canyon; from every part of which, bright gleaming candies glistened. The crisp leaves of holly mistletoe, and ivy reflected back at the light, as if so many little mirrors had been scattered there forever; and such a mighty blaze went roaring up the chimney, as that dull petrification of a hearth had never known in Scrooge's time, or Marley's, or for many and many a winter season gone. Heaped up on the floor, to form a kind of throne, were chicken, duck, deer, lamb, salad, pork, sausages, bread pudding, peach pie, oranges, and wine. In easy state upon this couch, there sat a jolly Giant, glorious to see; who bore a glowing torch, in shape not unlike Plenty's horn, and held it up, high up, to shed its light on Scrooge, as he came peeping around the door. 

Scrooge reverently did so. It was clothed in one simple red robe, or mantle, bordered with gray fur. This garment hung so loosely on the figure, that its capacious breast was bare, as if disdaining to be warded or concealed by any artifice. Its feet, observable beneath the ample folds of the garment, were also bare; dark red curls were long and free; free as its genial face, its sparkling eye, its open hand, its cheery voice, its unconstrained demeanor, and its joyful air. Girded round its middle was an antique scabbard; but no sword was in it, and the ancient sheath was eaten up with rust.