# Song 1: "Crazy Train" - Ozzy Osbourne
1. What is the overall message of the song? **The overall message of this song is about how Osbourne sees the state of the world and how society treats each other. He talks about how people act as enemies and how people can still act better to each other. He references government control and the aftermath of the Cold War. This shows his anti-war sentiment and how it affects him personally.**
2. In what specific ways (give textual and/or visual evidence) does the song showcase this time period? **The distorted image as well as the very powerful guitar riffs portray how Osbourne feels towards the topics he touches on in the song, which is one of insanity and discordance. He also uses the same chorus "I'm going off the rails like a crazy train" which notates how he's going insane after society delves into darkness.**
3. What is your opinion of the song? Why? **I think this song is a very accurate portrayal of the feelings that could have been felt during the time, especially among people with anti-war sentiments. This song would definitely resonate with them. I also think that this song was good musically as well, because of the extremely powerful guitar.**
# Song 2: "Seconds" - U2
1. What is the overall message of the song? **This song conveys the dangers that the Cold War was bringing on the world at the time. It was released at a time where the threat of nuclear war was imminent, which was the main precedent of the song. When the song says "it takes a second to say goodbye," it gives a sense of close threat, almost like it is on the horizon. The main premise of the song is that the Cold War is dangerous and the potential for nuclear destruction.**
2. In what specific ways (give textual and/or visual evidence) does the song showcase this time period? **The singer uses multiple references to how the nuclear testing that countries were participating in were far too dangerous and mysterious for the scientists to understand, and the threat of them, was entirely out of their reach, which can be seen in the line "And they're doing the atomic bomb, do they know where the dance comes from." They also make references to the USSR, GDR, London, New York, and Peking, which are all places where the power is being focused.**
3. What is your opinion of the song? Why? **I like the song because I think the way that the band integrated their references to the lives of the people living at the time, as well as historical references to the causes and reasonings behind the Cold War, brings it all together.**
# Song 3: "Paper Planes" - M.I,A., 2007
1. What is the overall message of the song? **It is a very politically charged song, with main themes surrounding immigration, globalization, and struggling for survival in a marginalized community. They also reference drug use, violence, and criminal activity, which can be seen as a commentary on how harsh the reality of living among a marginalized community is. S**
2. In what specific ways (give textual and/or visual evidence) does the song showcase this time period? ****
3. What is your opinion of the song? Why? ****