Tags: #APGov
# Vocab

- **Bicameral Legislation**: A legislature divided into two houses. The U.S. Congress and all state legislatures except Nebraska’s are bicameral
- **House Rules Committee**: The committee in the House of Representatives that reviews most
bills coming from a House committee before they go to the full House.
- **Filibuster**: A strategy unique to the Senate whereby opponents of a piece of legislation use their right to unlimited debate to prevent the Senate from ever voting on a bill. Sixty members present and voting can halt a filibuster.
- **Speaker of the House**: An office mandated by the Constitution. The Speaker is chosen in practice by the majority party, has both formal and informal powers, and is second in line to succeed to the presidency should that office become vacant.
- **Majority Leader**: The principal partisan ally of the Speaker of the House, or the party’s
manager in the Senate. The majority leader is responsible for scheduling bills, influencing committee assignments, and rounding up votes on behalf of the party’s legislative positions.
- **Whips**: Party leaders who work with the majority leader or minority leader to count votes beforehand and lean on waverers whose votes are crucial to a bill favored by the party
- **Standing Committee**: Separate subject-matter committees in each house of Congress that handle bills in different policy areas
- **Joint Committee**: Congressional committees on a few subject-matter areas with membership drawn from both houses.
- **Conference Committee**: Congressional committees formed when the Senate and the House pass a particular bill in different forms. Party leadership appoints members from each house to iron out the differences and bring back a single bill.
- **Select Committee**: Congressional committees appointed for a specific purpose, such as the Watergate investigation.
- **Legislative Oversight**: Congress’s monitoring of the bureaucracy and its administration of policy, performed mainly through hearings
- **Committee Chairs**: The most important influencers of the
congressional agenda. They play dominant roles in scheduling hearings, hiring staff, appointing subcommittees, and managing committee bills when they are brought before the full house.
- **Seniority System**: A simple rule for picking committee
chairs, in effect until the 1970s. The member who had served on the committee the longest and whose party controlled the chamber became chair, regardless of party loyalty, mental state, or competence
- **Caucus(congressional)**: A group of members of Congress sharing some interest or characteristic. Many are composed of members from both parties and from both houses
- **Bill**: A proposed law, drafted in legal language. Anyone can draft a bill, but only a member of the House of Representatives or the Senate can formally submit a bill for consideration.

# Notes

## American Bicameralism

- The U.S. Congress is bicameral, as is every American state legislature except Nebraska's, which is unicameral. Each state is guaranteed 2 senators, and the number a state has is determined by its population. No bill can be passed unless both House and Senate agree on it; each body can thus veto the policies of the other.

### The House

- The House of Representatives is four times as large as the Senate. Partly because there are more members, leaders in the House do more leading than Senate leadership. The House Rules Committee reviews most bills coming from a House committee before they go to the full House. The committee gives each bill a "rule," which schedules the bill on the calendar, allots time for debate, and specifies what kind of amendments may be offered. The Speaker appoints the committee's members; the House Rules Committee is generally responsive to the House leadership.

### The Senate

- The Senate is less disciplined and less centralized than the House, but it has just as much legislative power. Michael Woolrich: The filibuster is a weapon used by a minority to defeat a majority. He says the power of the filibusters is not absolute; 60 senators can halt a session with a vote.

## Congressional Leadership

- Few members of Congress consider themselves followers, and the most influential are those whose party put them there. Much of the leadership in Congress is really party leadership, with a few formal posts whose occupants are chosen by non-party procedures.

### The House

- The Speaker of the House is the most important leader in the House. He or she exercises substantial control over which bills get assigned to which committees. The Speaker is two heartbeats away from the presidency, and second in line to succeed a president if he or she were ever impeached or resigns. Speaker of the House has formal congressional powers, but also a great deal of informal clout. Th e Speaker's principal ally is the majority leader, who is elected by his or her party and responsible for scheduling bills and rounding up votes on behalf of the party's position on legislation. The minority party also has a minority leader and whips, who operate much like their counterparts in the majority party.

### The Senate

- The vice president’s only constitutionally defined job is to serve as
president of the Senate. However, vice presidents usually slight their senatorial chores,
except in the rare case when their vote can break a tie. Modern vice presidents are
active in representing the president’s views to senators, however.
It is the Senate majority leader—currently Democrat Harry Reid of Nevada—
who, aided by the majority whip, serves as the workhorse of the party, corralling votes,
scheduling floor action, and influencing committee assignments. Th e majority leader’s counterpart in the opposition, the minority leader—currently Republican Mitch
McConnell of Kentucky—has similar responsibilities and is supported by the minority
whip. Power is widely dispersed in the contemporary Senate. Therefore, party leaders
must appeal broadly for support, often speaking to the country directly or indirectly
over television.

### The Congressional Leadership In Perspective

- Despite their stature and power, congressional leaders cannot always move their troops. Power in both houses of Congress is decentralized. Leaders are elected by their party members and must remain responsive to them. Greater policy agreement within each party has encouraged members to delegate power to their leaders.

## The Committee and Subcommittee

- Most of the real work of Congress goes on in committees, and committees dominate congressional policy making. Standing committees handle bills in different policy areas; each house has its own standing committees. Joint committees exist in a few policy areas, such as the economy and taxation. Conference committees are formed when Senate and House pass different versions of the same bill.

### The Committee At Work: Legislature

- Every bill goes to a standing committee, which has virtually the power of life and death over it. A committee's most important output is the "marked-up" (rewritten) bill itself, which it submits to the full House or Senate for debate and voting. The work of committees does not stop when the bill leaves the committee room.

### The Committee At Work: Oversight

- Committee staffs and committee members grill agency heads about particular problems. Committee members have specialized expertise in the fields and agencies that their committees oversee. They also maintain an extensive network of formal and informal contacts with the bureaucracy. Through oversight, Congress can pressure agencies and, in extreme cases, cut their budgets. Congressional oversight of government grew in the 1960s as the executive branch became too powerful. In recent years, members of Congress have sought to protect programs they favor from budget cuts and to get more value for tax dollars spent on them. Because of this lack of incentives, problems may be overlooked until it is too late to do much about them. The fragmentation of committee jurisdictions also inhibits Congress from taking a comprehensive view of complex issue areas.

### Getting On A Committee

- Members of Congress aim to be on committees that will help them achieve three goals: reelection, influence in Congress, and the opportunity to make policy. The parties try to grant members' requests for committee assignments whenever possible. Party leaders almost always play a key role in committee selection.

### Committee Chairs And The Seniority System

- Committee chairs are the most influential influencers of the congressional agenda. They play dominant roles in scheduling hearings, hiring staff, appointing subcommittees, and managing bills. Until the 1970s, there was a simple way of picking committee chairs: the senioritysystem. Today, younger members of Congress revolted, and both parties allow members to vote on committee chairs.

## Caucuses: The Informal Organization of Congress

- Although the formal organization of Congress consists of its party leadership and its
committee structures, the informal organization of Congress is also important. Informal
networks of trust and mutual interest have long sprung from numerous sources, including friendship, ideology, and geography. Lately, the informal organization of Congress has been dominated by a growing number of caucuses. In this context, a caucus is a group of members of Congress who share some interest or characteristic. Th ere are nearly 500 caucuses, most of them containing members from both parties and some containing members from
both the House and the Senate. Th e goal of all caucuses is to promote the interests
around which they are formed. Caucuses press for committees to hold hearings, push
particular legislation, and pull together votes on bills they favor. They are somewhat
like interest groups but with a difference: their members are members of Congress, not petitioners to Congress on the outside looking in. Th us caucuses—interest groups within Congress—are nicely situated to pack more punch. 46 Th is explosion of informal groups in Congress has made the representation of interests in Congress a more direct process. Some caucuses, such as the Black Caucus, the Caucus for Women’s Issues, and the Hispanic Caucus, focus on advancing the interests of demographic groups. Others, such as the Sunbelt Caucus, are based on regional groupings. Still others, such as the Republican Study Committee, are ideological groupings. Many caucuses are based on economic interests. For example,
the Congressional Bourbon Caucus advocates for the bourbon industry by fighting
proposals like a tax increase on liquor, while the Congressional Gaming Caucus deals
with issues like reinvigorating the tourism industry and making sure regulations for
Internet gambling are fair. Other caucuses focus, for instance, on health issues or on
foreign policy matters dealing with specific countries.

## Congressional Staff

- Members of Congress are often unable to keep up with the details of the hundreds of bills they are responsible for each year, so they turn to their staff for help.

### Personal Staff

- The average representative has 17 assistants and the average senator has 40. More than 11,000 individuals serve on the personal staff s of members of Congress. About 4,000 interns also work in members' offices on Capitol Hill. Other personal staff help members with legislative functions, including drafting legislation

### Committee Staff

- Lobbyists spend a lot of time cultivating staffers, both to obtain information about likely legislative actions and to plant ideas for legislation. The committees of the House and Senate employ another 2,000 or so staff members. Committee staff members possess high levels of expertise and can become very influential in policymaking.

### Staff Agencies

- Committees, caucuses, and individual legislators follow bills from their introduction to their approval. The GAO also sets government standards for accounting, provides legal opinions, and settles claims against the government. CBO focuses on analyzing the president's budget and making economic projections about the performance of the economy.


