Tags: [[AP Government]] #Bureaucracy

- **regulation**: The use of governmental authority to control or change some practice in the private sector

# Regulation in the Economy and in everyday life
- SEC regulates buying and selling stock 
- NLRB (National Labor Regulations Board) takes care of the relations between workers and managers
-  The Department of Labor and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission mandate affirmative action in hiring workers in automobile production plants because automakers are major government contractors. 
-  The EPA, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, and the Department of Transportation require that cars include pollution-control, energy-saving, and safety devices. 
-  Unfair advertising and deceptive consumer practices in marketing cars come under the watchful eye of the FTC.
-  With the growth of regulation, **deregulation**: the lifting of government restrictions on business, industry, and professional activities—became a fashionable term. 31 Th e idea behind deregulation is that the number and complexity of regulatory policies have made regulation too complicated and burdensome. To critics, regulation distorts market forces and has the following problems: 
	-  **Raising prices**. If the producer is faced with expensive regulations, the cost will inevitably be passed on to the consumer in the form of higher prices.
	-  **Hurting America’s competitive position abroad**: Other nations may have fewer regulations on pollution, worker safety, and other business practices than the United States. Th us, American products may cost more in the international marketplace, undermining sales in other countries. 
	-  **Failing to work well**: Tales of failed regulatory policies are numerous. Regulations may be difficult or cumbersome to enforce. Critics charge that regulations sometimes do not achieve the results that Congress intended and maintain that they simply create massive regulatory bureaucracies.