Tags: 
		[[AP Government]] 
		[[AP Government Readings]] 
		[[15.6 - The Courts and Public Policy - A Historical Review]]
		
---------------------------------------------------------

- Confronted with controversial policies, the Courts must make controversial decisions
- Until Civil War, main questions concerned slavery and strength and legitimacy of federal government
- After Civil War to ~1937, questions about relationship between federal government economy predominated
- From 1938 to now, questions about personal liberty and social and political equality have predominated

# John Marshall and the Growth of Judicial Review
- **Marbury v. Madison** The 1803 case in which Chief Justice John Marshall and his associates first asserted the right of the Supreme Court to determine the meaning of the U.S. Constitution. The decision established the Court’s power of judicial review over acts of Congress, in this case the Judiciary Act of 1789.
- **Judicial Review**: power of the courts to hold acts of Congress and, by implication, the executive in violation of the Constitution
- By in effect reducing its own power, or the authority to hear cases such as Marbury’s under its original jurisdiction, the Court was able to assert the right of judicial review in a  fashion that the other branches could not easily rebuke 

# The "Nine Old Men"
- During the New Deal, Congress passed dozens of laws designed to end the depression, which to conservative politicians, who viewed federal intervention in the economy as unconstitutional dominated the Court
- Roosevelt in 1937 proposed  a “court-packing plan.” Congress objected and never passed the plan. It became irrelevant, however, when two justices, Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes and Associate Justice Owen Roberts, began switching their votes in favor of New Deal legislation. 

# The Warren Court
- President Eisenhower appointed Warren when the Court faced the issue of school segregation. In 1954, it held that laws requiring segregation of the public schools were unconstitutional.

# The Burger Court
- Richard Nixon wanted to appoint a “strict constructionist” - one who interprets the Constitution narrowly—as chief justice
	- Warren E. Burger, then a conservative judge on the District of Columbia Court of Appeals
- It narrowed defendants’ rights, though it did not overturn the fundamental contours of the Miranda decision
- One of the most notable decisions of the Burger Court weighed against Burger’s appointer, Richard Nixon. At the height of the Watergate scandal, the Supreme Court was called on to decide whether Nixon had to turn his White House tapes over to the courts. 

# The Rehnquist and Roberts Courts
- By the early 1990s, the conservative nominees of Republican presidents, led by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, composed a clear Supreme Court majority. In 2005, John Roberts replaced Rehnquist as chief justice, but the basic divisions on the Court have remained relatively stable.
- one evaluates the Court’s direction, in most cases in recent years the Court has not created a revolution in constitutional law

