16.1 
- economic conditions affect voter's electoral decisions
- voters tend to engage in *sociotropic* voting: assessing the overall rate of employment and unemployment instead of individual characteristics.

# Two Major Worries: Unemployment and Inflation
- **unemployment rate**: percentage of Americans seeking work who are unable to find it
	- varies from time to time and group to group
	- tends to be higher for young adults
- Bureau of Labor Stats in Dep. of Labor has this job
- **underemployment rate**: BLS statistic that takes into account not only the people who aren't working or actively seeking a job, but ppl who are so discouraged to work that they work a part-time job
- **inflation**: rise in prices for goods and services
- **CPI (Consumer Price Index)**: key measure of inflation -- the change in the cost of buying a fixed basket of goods and services

# Policies for Controlling the Economy
- voters expect politicians to use the power of the federal government to try and control the economy
- **laissez-faire**: gov't should not meddle in economy

#### Monetary Policy and the "Fed"
- All these markets interpreted Greenspan’s remark to mean that he thought stocks were overvalued and that the Fed might raise American interest rates to cool down escalating stock prices and prevent an inflationary spiral. Such is the power that the chair of the Fed can exercise at any time
- **monetary policy**: manipulation of money supply and credit in private hands.
- **monetarism**: An economic theory holding that the supply of money is the key to a nation’s economic health, with too much cash and credit in circulation producing inflation.
- **Federal Reserve System**: The main instrument for making monetary policy in the United States. It was created by Congress in 1913 to regulate the lending practices of banks and thus the money supply
- the complicated financial dealings of the Fed affect the amount of money available and interest rates, which in turn impact inflation and the availability of jobs.

#### Fiscal Policy: Keynesian vs. Supply-side Economics
- **fiscal policy:** Use of the federal budget—taxes, spending, and borrowing—to influence the economy; along with monetary policy, a main tool by which the government can attempt to steer the economy. Fiscal policy is almost entirely determined by Congress and the president.
- **Keynesian economic theory:** Named after English economist John Maynard Keynes, the theory emphasizing that government spending and deficits can help the economy deal with its ups and downs. Proponents of this theory advocate using the power of government to stimulate the economy when it is lagging.
- **supply-side economics:** An economic theory, first applied during the Reagan administration, holding that the key task for fiscal policy is to stimulate the supply of goods, as by cutting tax rates

# Why is it hard to control the economy?
- politicians manipulate economy for short-run adv. to win elections
- easy for politicians to control economic conditions precisely in order to facilitate reelection
- Another problem that policymakers face is that trying to control economic indicators like unemployment and inflation with precision is like attempting to stop on an economic dime
- 