Tags: #APGov

# The Road to Revolution
- Parliament really only dealt w/ policy & trade. Everything else was Taxes were colonists needed for America's foreign left to the colonies defense, no representation in Parliament
	- Protects against taxes\
- First Cont. Congress so 7774 Declaring Independence taxes.


# Declaring Independence
- Common Sense (Jan. 1776) by Thomas Paine increased flames of revolution
- Committee selected to create Dec. of Incep.
	- Thomas J. (VA), John A. (MA); Ben F. ( PA); Roger S. (CT); Robert Livingston (NY) was primary outher DOI

- The Declaration was a polemic (Political Argument) announcing & justifying a revolution 

	- this was so it raised attention to france to provide foreign assistance.

# The English Heritage: The power of ideas
- The philosophy people the in the gov't. to Power of Ideas committee & other philosophical leaders applied
	-	**John Locke**: Natural rights (life, liberty & property): rights for humans, not from government
		-	Consent of the Governed; the ppl most agree on who the ruler is.
		-	Limited Government: clear restrictions on what rulers should do.
		-	wanted to PROTECT natural rights right & A 4114
		-	Govt's should be able to.
			-	provide standing laws so ppl know what's right and wrong
			-   property cannot be taken without content. 
			-   people can revolt against government if absolutely necessary

# The American Creed
 - John Locke's thought & Jefferson's language closely related 
 - if someone thought that the government couldn't provide "life, liberty & pursuit of happiness", they could revolt and form a new government
- Jefferson's Claims in the Declaration of Independence
	- in the ppl should have primacy over government
	- rule instead of being ruled
	- each person created as an individual & equal 
	- unalienable rights
 - consent of the governed allowed for legit political power
 # Winning Independence 
 - 8500+30000 British, ~5000 American 
 
 # The Conservative Revolution .
- Unlike other revolutions around that time, this didn't drastically change the way of life for the colonists. 
- Purpose was to restore rights that the colonists thought was theirs 
- didn't create conflicts, created stability.